
                The European Union on Monday (13 February) called on Turkey to avoid threats and “refrain from any actions that might damage good neighbourly” ties after Cyprus accused the Turkish military of obstructing a ship exploring for gas.
Cyprus said on Sunday the Turkish military had obstructed a vessel contracted by Italian oil company ENI which was approaching an area to explore for natural gas.
Greek Cypriots run Cyprus’s internationally recognised government, while Turkish Cypriots have a breakaway state in the north – recognised only by Ankara – and say resources around the island belong to them too.
After speaking to the Cyprus President Nicos Anastasiades, European Council President Donald Tusk urged Turkey to “avoid threats or actions against any EU member and instead commit to good neighbourly relations, peaceful dispute settlement and respect for territorial sovereignty.”
Turkey’s foreign ministry made no mention of the ENI ship in a statement on Sunday, but said the case was a unilateral move by Greek Cypriots that violated the sovereign rights of Turkish Cypriots.
It said the Greek Cypriots were jeopardising security and stability on the island and in the region.



Cyprus, Turkey spar after warships block gas drilling ship
Cyprus yesterday (11 February) insisted Turkey had breached “international law” after Ankara’s warships blocked an Italian drilling ship on course to explore for gas in the island’s politically sensitive waters.


A spokeswoman for the European Commission echoed Tusks’s line, telling journalists on Monday that “Turkey needs to commit unequivocally to neighbourly relations and avoid any kind of source of friction, threat or action directed against a member state.”
“The EU also stresses the need to respect the sovereignty of member states over their territorial sea and airspace,” she added.
On Monday Greece accused Turkey of violating international law and said its “provocative conduct” was inconsistent with that of a country seeking accession to the EU.
“We call on Turkey to desist from further unlawful actions and to comply with its obligations stemming from international law,” the foreign ministry in Athens said in a statement.



Greece-Turkey tensions mount over plan to start Cyprus gas drilling
As Cyprus prepares to start offshore drilling for gas in its economic zone, Turkey announced it was readying “countermeasures” and Greece replied it was “ready to defend its sovereign rights”, in a clear sign of growing tensions between the two NATO members.


Relations between the EU and Turkey have become strained by disagreements over democracy and human rights, especially since a large-scale crackdown in the wake of a failed Turkish coup in 2016.
However, European countries still rely on Turkey as a NATO ally and as a brake to help reduce an influx of Syrian and other migrants and refugees into the bloc.
Turkey’s EU minister, Omer Celik, will join 28 foreign ministers of the bloc for talks in Bulgaria on Friday. Ankara is pushing to lift visa requirements for its citizens travelling to Europe.
The EU is unwilling to grant Turks that concession now but, careful to avoid upsetting President Tayyip Erdoğan too much, is due to commit more money for the large number of Syrian refugees living in Turkey.



Cyprus Ambassador:  The EU should tell Turkey that gunboat diplomacy is over 
The European Union should make Turkey understand that in the 21st, century gunboat diplomacy has no place, Kornelios Korneliou, Permanent Representative of Cyprus to the EU told EURACTIV in an exclusive interview. In October, Turkey sent naval vessels specialising in seismic exploration, into Cyprus’ Exclusive Economic Zone, without permission.


            
