
                This Event Report is also available in German.
The global economy is undergoing major and irreversible changes, which raises the question as to how to ensure workers’ voices are being heard and taken into account within EU-based companies.
The Hans Böckler Stiftung held a two-day symposium that addressed the challenges not only workers in Europe are facing but also the new EU-leaders who will emerge after the May 2019 elections:
How to protect and strengthen the capacity of workers and their representatives to influence strategic decisions within companies? How to improve workers’ information, consultation and participation rights at the EU-level? What can and should the European Commission do?

                Download PDF  
        
        
        Strengthening workers’ voice, legal certainty for future Social Europe
                    
                Opinion | Economy & Jobs                
             07-05-2018
        
            
                
            A vital social democracy will play a decisive role in shaping the future of the European Union. The goal of a united Europe, contractually agreed by all EU member states, is to promote participatory democracy, writes Norbert Kluge.
        
    



        
        Putting the social dimension on equal footing with the economy
                    
                News | Economy & Jobs                
             07-05-2018
        
            
                
            An improved EU legislation that boosts workers’ information, consultation and participation rights will push social matters higher up on the EU political agenda, according to the participants of a symposium about workers held in Brussels on 26-27 April.
        
    



        
        European Dialogue 2018: Social Europe Strengthening Workers’ Voice
                    
                 Video | Promoted content | Economy & Jobs                
             04-05-2018
        
            
                
            The worker's voice is part of a democratic Europe. Securing and strengthening it is supposed to increase the acceptance of the EU.
        
    



        
        EU must offer ‘an agenda of hope’, says Socialist leader Bullmann
                    
                Interview | Future EU                
             03-05-2018
        
            
                
            There is no alternative to the European Union, but it needs to offer an 'agenda of hope' to Europeans, Udo Bullmann, MEP, the new leader of the Socialist and Democrat group, said in an interview with EURACTIV.  
        
    


