
                The European Union called on Monday for the killers of a Slovak journalist to be brought to justice after the weekend murder of Ján Kuciak raised questions about organised crime and corruption in the EU state.
“Justice must be served,” tweeted Frans Timmermans, the deputy head of the European Commission, who is leading efforts by the EU executive to bolster civil rights and democratic standards in some of the bloc’s newer, ex-communist members.
“Shocked by the murder of a journalist in the EU. No democracy can survive without the free press,” Timmermans added.


Shocked by the murder of a journalist in the EU. No democracy can survive without the free press, which is why journalists deserve respect and protection. Our thoughts go out to the loved ones of Ján Kuciak & his girlfriend Martina Kušnírová. Justice must be served.
— Frans Timmermans (@TimmermansEU) February 26, 2018

EU Justice Commissioner Věra Jourová, a Czech, said: “This murder puts freedom of press and democracy in danger.”


The murder of Jan Kuciak and his partner is tragic. This murder puts freedom of press and democracy in danger. Two young lives are gone and I hope the perpetrators will be brought to #justice as soon as possible.  https://t.co/glCE49W4HS
— Věra Jourová (@VeraJourova) February 26, 2018

The president of the European Parliament, Italian former journalist Antonio Tajani, recalled that it was just four months ago that another journalist investigating allegations of graft in a small European Union country was murdered in Malta.


The EU cannot accept that a journalist is killed for doing his job. I call on the Slovak authorities to launch a thorough investigation with international support if needed for Jan Kuciak. As with  #DaphneCaruanaGalizia, the European Parliament will not rest until justice is done
— EP President Tajani (@EP_President) February 26, 2018

“The EU cannot accept that a journalist is killed for doing his job,” Tajani tweeted. “I call on the Slovak authorities to launch a thorough investigation with international support if needed for Jan Kuciak. As with Daphne Caruana Galizia, the European Parliament will not rest until justice is done.”



Murder of Malta’s top investigative journalist provokes shock and outrage
Daphne Caruana Galizia, Malta’s top investigative journalist, was killed on Monday (16 October) when the car she was driving exploded shortly after she left her home.


Kuciak, 27, often reported on fraud cases involving business people connected to the ruling party and other politicians. He and his girlfriend were found dead on Sunday at his home, east of Bratislava.



The Brief – Killing of journalists is mafia show of force
Four months after a huge car bomb explosion killed Daphne Caruana Galizia in Malta, Ján Kuciak, a 27-year-old reporter for the aktuality.sk news portal, and his girlfriend Martina Kušnírová were found killed on Sunday night in their home in Velka Maca, some 65 kilometres from the Slovak capital Bratislava.


His outlet’s German publisher, Axel Springer, condemned the “cruel assassination” of its journalist and Slovakia’s leaders promised to bring those responsible for the killings to justice.
            
