
                The EU is like a cabbage, it has many layers. An important one is the political families, like the EPP, the European Peoples’ Party, PES, the Party of European Socialists, or ALDE, the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats in Europe.
Historically, the EPP and ALDE were born first, in 1976. EPP has been the largest in the European Parliament since 1999. PES was established much later, in 1992. Today the heads of state and governments of these countries hold meetings ahead of EU summits and devise strategies to shape policies and obtain top international jobs.
The political families also try to help members win national elections.
It’s interesting to note that political forces from all European countries can be members of the European political families. This includes the EU hopefuls Macedonia, Serbia, Kosovo, Albania, Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina. EPP and PES takes sister parties from these countries as associate members.
The EPP and ALDE also take on board sister parties from the Eastern Partnership, and ALDE has taken on board even two Russian parties (Yabloko and Parnass).
For a political force in a country like Macedonia, to be part of a European political family is a great credential. But this is precisely when things often go wrong.
For years it has been known that the political force of Nikola Gruevski, VMRO-DPMNE, affiliated to the EPP, has little to do with European values. Leaked wiretaps have exposed Gruevski as prime minister talking about arranging court cases, placing judges in senior positions, and much more.
The EPP, however, stood firm in support of Gruevski, which did little service to the country. The EPP keeps in its ranks political forces such as Viktor Orban’s Fidesz, although EPP members of the European Parliament are divided over the issue. Joseph Daul, the president of the EPP, said about Orbán: “He’s the enfant terrible of the EPP family, but I like him”.
These are some of the (many) bad examples. There are also good examples. Frans Timmermans, the most senior socialist in the Juncker Commission, has twice in less than a year issued stern warnings against the social-democrat government in Romania. There are, of course, good reasons for that.
Another great positive example is the position recently expressed by Joseph Daul with respect to the rare chance to resolve the Macedonian name dispute. If the dispute is solved, Macedonia or ‘the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia’ [we have no problem with either name] could at last join NATO and start accession talks to join the EU, under its new pro-European government.
Daul hailed the “window of opportunity” to resolve the name dispute, much to the distaste of New Democracy, the EPP sister party in Greece, whose leader Kyriakos Mitsotakis says exactly the opposite, probably because he is the hostage of a destructive extreme-right.
If the tendency of political families to be more careful about their hygiene is confirmed, who knows? Maybe they will be more successful at the next European elections.
The Roundup
The EU is warming to the idea of a flexible Brexit transition period. This would include allowing Britain to sign trade deals and launching new partnerships before any formal transition period is up. But airlines are afraid they will lose out if Britain quits the European Aviation Safety Agency.
Keen to signal the end of ten years of crises, EU leaders showed cautious optimism at the World Economic Forum. But they stressed there is no room for complacency.
Europe’s economy is getting stronger but it still has a way to go to uphold its democratic values. Get our take on the elephant in the room at Davos, plus a look at the week’s news from the EURACTIV network, in today’s Trans-Europe Express.
Read Jorge Valero’s exclusive interview with Spain’s Foreign Affairs Minister Alfonso Dastis. Over lunch at the WEF he discussed Catalonia, the euro and Spain-US relations, as well as dealing with a diplomatic crisis in Venezuela.
Albania’s PM Edi Rama told EURACTIV’s Editor-in-Chief Daniela Vincenti his country is ready to begin EU accession talks. “Thinking that the EU can sleep quietly with the Balkans outside its doors is a terrible mistake,” he said.
See all our coverage from the World Economic Forum in Davos here.
Turkey has called on the EU to back its anti-Kurdish military campaign in Syria, saying it is protecting the security of Europe.
France intends to ban controversial weed killer glyphosate within three years, but will exempt farmers who can demonstrate that they have no other choice.
It’s Friday! That means it’s time for Tweets of the Week. This week, Davos leaders drink wine and whine, Qualcomm hit with a massive fine, and Romanian rule of law is in serious decline.
Look out for…
Will Jean-Claude Juncker recover from his stomach flu in time to meet Czech PM Andrej Babis?
Views are the author’s
            
