
                A Croatian billionaire who set up one of the largest companies in the Balkans will be extradited back to his native country to face charges of fraud. But what chance does Ivica Todorić really have of getting a fair trial in the EU’s newest member state?
Todorić, aka the running man, made his fortune by founding Agrokor, a conglomerate that nearly collapsed last year under massive debt. The company accounts for 15% of Croatia’s GDP so it’s fair to say that the stakes are high in this case.
The phrase ‘too big to fail’ also comes to mind, hence the government’s massive effort to restructure Agrokor’s debt and keep it afloat.
The tycoon was accused of fraud, a charge he denies, although late last year he turned himself in to the British police after a Europe-wide arrest warrant was issued by Europol.
Todorić insists that the purpose of his stay in a posh residential area of London was not to escape Croatian justice but to prepare his defence. He also claims that he will not receive a fair trial in his homeland due to the political dimension of the Agrokor scandal.
But yesterday a British judge threw out Todorić’s plea and ruled that Croatia’s request for extradition should be granted. The chief magistrate refused to believe that political pressure would affect the chances of Todorić getting a fair trial.
But there may be an element of truth to Todorić’s worries about not getting a fair hearing.
Independent watchdog Freedom House’s annual democracy stock-take has warned that the Croatian judicial system “visibly deteriorated” in 2017. It cites the politicisation of the body that appoints judges, echoing fears that have been stoked in Brussels about Poland’s recent court reforms.
On a scale of 1 to 7, where 1 is the most democratic, Croatia scored 3.75 overall and just 4.5 for its judiciary, marking a slide in both cases since 2009, four years before the Adriatic nation joined the EU. That puts it below Bulgaria, Hungary and Poland.
There have been high-profile instances where the judiciary has been found wanting. A former prime minister’s case has dragged on for years and a well-known businessman was cleared of manslaughter after running over two swimmers with a boat, despite changing his story and despite having previous form.
That’s not to mention the Croatian media’s struggles. A delegation of press freedom experts has visited the country twice in the space of two years and has warned that there are serious concerns there.
Allegations of biased reporting by state-owned media, violence against journalists and even intelligence services agents turning up unannounced at a news channel have been made. That late-night visit was reportedly prompted by the station’s coverage of the Agrokor scandal.
So maybe Todorić has a point. Maybe the system that he took full advantage of to make his billions and, admittedly, provide employment for tens of thousands of people will now swallow him up if his appeal fails and he goes before a Zagreb court.
The Agrokor affair also raises questions about Croatia’s role in the EU. After all, plenty of headlines have been made lately about Poland and Hungary’s shortcomings, as well as Romania and Bulgaria’s ongoing struggles to satisfy Brussels’ ongoing justice monitoring.
Since the evidence shows the situation is getting worse, perhaps similar measures are needed or, at the very least, lessons have to be learned if the EU does indeed expand any time soon.
The Roundup
With Alexandra Brzozowski
Thank you, whistleblowers! After years of pressure, the Commission finally decided it will give more protection to individuals who expose fraud, tax evasion and data breaches.
Malta is on the EU’s radar this week, with Justice Commissioner Jourová travelling to the island nation to check progress on tackling money laundering and the murder case of Daphne Caruana Galizia.
The Council of Europe has appointed a special rapporteur to look into Malta, while a separate investigation into corruption in the Council itself threatens to have wide-reaching consequences. EPP President Joseph Daul called for members named in the report to be suspended.
Be sure to check out this interview with Russia’s man in Brussels.
French politicians have adopted a controversial draft law on asylum and immigration. But some of the provisions could be contrary to European law.
Commission Vice-President Dombrovskis told the UK’s financial sector that the EU and UK regimes could co-exist together after Brexit. But London will (obviously) be unable to shape the decision-making process.
Northern Europe has big wind power plans, with Belgium and Denmark in particular set to go big on turbines.
It’s a defining time for Theresa May’s government and she could face a no-confidence motion if things don’t go her way during a key vote on Thursday. An overseas travel form dated last year that put Strasbourg in Belgium suggests that luck (or competence) is not on her side though.
Apparently the European Parliament tried to roll out a new sorting system in its canteen today but it didn’t really go to plan…
Look out for…
Tomorrow is Liberation Day in Italy, celebrating the end of the Nazi occupation. Still no news on a government being formed though. President Sergio Mattarella has appointed a new mediator to see if there is any chance of the Five Star Movement and the Democratic Party teaming up (or not…)
Views are the author’s
            
