
                The Czech Social Democratic Party (ČSSD) picked former parliament speaker Jan Hamáček as their chairman yesterday (18 February), bringing closer a possible breakthrough in forming a viable government.
Prime Minister Andrej Babiš is still trying to find allies after his minority government lost a confidence vote in January, mainly because of allegations that he fraudulently claimed European Union subsidies worth €2 million a decade ago.



Czech police charge leading candidate with EU funding fraud
Andrej Babiš, the Czech billionaire who is a leading candidate to become prime minister in elections next week, said yesterday (9 October) that he had been charged with fraud over EU subsidies received by one of his companies.


Babiš has denied any wrongdoing, but almost all other parties have declined to cooperate with his ANO movement which has only 78 seats in the 200-strong lower chamber of parliament and thus needs partners to form a majority.



Czech PM Babiš battles fraud charges as cabinet loses confidence vote
Czech Prime Minister Andrej Babiš’s minority government lost a confidence vote yesterday (16 January), forcing him to try to cut a deal with opposition parties to stay in office while he also battles allegations of subsidy fraud.


Hamáček, whose Social Democrats ruled in coalition with ANO and the Christian Democrats (KDU) from January 2014 until last December, won 272 votes at the ČSSD congress, beating former regional government chief Jan Zimola, who got 224 votes.
He had said before the congress that party members should decide whether the ČSSD with its 15 lawmakers joins a coalition with ANO or supports its minority government.
Hamáček said in a letter to party members that Babiš should not be part of such a government. This could change if the only other option was to hold an early election, he said in an interview for www.idnes.cz news website.
Only the Communist party, with 15 lawmakers, has said it might lend Babiš’ government external support, although the centre-right Mayors movement (STAN) said this week it could negotiate with ANO, something it had previously ruled out.
Analysts have said mainstream opposition parties might change their positions in order to prevent possible cooperation between ANO and the Communists or the far-right, anti-EU Freedom and Direct Democracy (SPD) party.
            
